.\"	$OpenBSD: help.1,v 1.12 2013/07/16 00:07:52 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Aaron Campbell
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt HELP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm help
.Nd help for new users and administrators
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This document is meant to familiarize new users and system administrators with
.\" .Ox
LiteBSD
and, if necessary,
.Ux
in general.
.Pp
Firstly, a wealth of information is contained within the system manual pages.
In
.Ux ,
the
.Xr man 1
command is used to view them.
Type
.Ic man man
for instructions on how to use it properly.
Pay especially close attention to the
.Fl k
option.
.Pp
Other
.\" .Ox
LiteBSD
resources include the forum, located at
.Lk http://retrobsd.org/index.php ,
which wecolmes all users, developers, and system administrators of all
.Ux
skill levels.
There is also a GitHub repository of the
.\" .Ox
LiteBSD
code; see
.Lk https://github.com/sergev/LiteBSD .
Finally, there is a separate GitHub repository for
LiteBSD
ports; see
.Lk https://github.com/ibara/LiteBSD-Ports .
This second repository contains third-party software that can be built
by users in lieu of using binary packages.
.Ss The Unix shell
After logging in, some system messages are typically displayed, and then the
user is able to enter commands to be processed by the shell program.
The shell is a command-line interpreter that reads user input (normally from
a terminal) and executes commands.
There are many different shells available;
.\" .Ox
LiteBSD
ships with
.Xr ash 1 ,
.Xr csh 1 ,
and
.Xr ksh 1 .
Each user's shell is indicated by the last field of their corresponding entry
in the system password file
.Pf ( Pa /etc/passwd ) .
Note that
.Xr ksh 1
is the default shell for users; it is likely what you are using now.
It is also the default
.Xr sh 1 .
.Ss Basic Unix commands
.Bl -tag -width "chmodXXX"
.It Cm man
Interface to the system manual pages.
For any of the commands listed below, type
.Ic man <command>
for detailed information on what it does and how to use it.
.It Cm pwd
Print working directory.
Files are organized in a hierarchy (see
.Xr hier 7 )
called a tree.
This command will indicate in which directory you are currently located.
.It Cm cd
Change working directory.
Use this command to navigate throughout the file hierarchy.
For example, type
.Ic cd /
to change the working directory to the root.
.It Cm ls
List directory contents.
Type
.Ic ls -l
for a detailed listing.
.It Cm cat
Although it has many more uses,
.Ic cat filename
will print the contents of a plain-text file to the screen.
.It Cm mkdir
Make a directory.
For example,
.Ic mkdir foobar .
.It Cm rmdir
Remove a directory.
.It Cm rm
Remove files.
Files are generally only removable by their owners.
See the
.Xr chmod 1
command for information on file permissions.
.It Cm chmod
Change file modes, including permissions.
It is not immediately obvious how to use this command; please read its manual
page carefully, as proper file permissions, especially on system files, are
vital in maintaining security and integrity.
.It Cm cp
Copy files.
.It Cm mv
Move and rename files.
.It Cm ps
List active processes.
Most
.Ux Ns -based
operating systems, including
.\" .Ox ,
LiteBSD,
are multitasking, meaning many programs share system resources at the same
time.
A common usage is
.Ic ps -auxw ,
which will display information about all active processes.
.It Cm kill
Kill processes.
Used mostly for terminating run-away/unresponsive programs, but also used to
signal programs for requesting certain operations (e.g., re-read their
configuration).
.It Cm date
Print the current system date and time.
.It Cm mail
Access mailbox.
.It Cm exit
Log out of the system.
.El
.Pp
When a command is entered, it is first checked to see if it is built-in to the
shell.
If not, the shell looks for the command in any directories contained within the
.Ev PATH
environment variable (see
.Xr environ 7 ) .
If the command is not found, an error message is printed.
Otherwise, the shell runs the command, passing it any arguments specified on
the command line.
.Pp
Shell built-in commands do not have their own manual page,
so it's necessary to read the manual page for the user's shell.
Tools such as
.Xr which 1
and
.Dq whence ,
a
.Xr ksh 1
built-in command,
can be used to see what commands are being executed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ash 1 ,
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr ksh 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr whereis 1 ,
.Xr which 1
.Sh HISTORY
This manual page was written by
.An Aaron Campbell Aq Mt aaron@openbsd.org
and first appeared in
.Ox 2.6 .
It was adapted slighty for
LiteBSD
by
.An Brian Callahan Aq Mt bcallah@devio.us .
